Total Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return 
Involving Drainage Above, Below, and To the 
Heart: A Mixed Bag 
CASE REPORT 
J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2004;17:1084-5. 
0894-7317/$30.00 
Copyright 2004 by the American Society of Echocardiography. 
Grace C. Kung, MD, Hui Gao, RDCS, Pierre C. Wong, MD, Mark S. Sklansky, MD, 
Merujan Y. Uzunyan, MD, and John C. Wood, MD, Los Angeles, California 
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return 
(TAPVR) is defined as abnormal drainage of the 
pulmonary venous blood to the systemic venous 
system. TAPVR can be classified by the location of 
the abnormal drainage as being supracardiac (type 
I), cardiac (type II), infracardiac (type III), or mixed 
(type IV).1 Most of these connections involve a 
common pulmonary venous confluence that then 
drains to the specified site. Accurate definition of 
the sites of drainage is important in determining the 
appropriate surgical approach. Two-dimensional 
echocardiography with color flow Doppler has been 
shown to accurately establish the diagnosis.2 We 
present an interesting case of type IV mixed TAPVR 
diagnosed by echocardiography that involves all 3 
locations (types I-III) with no common pulmonary 
venous confluence and no other major associated 
cardiac abnormalities. To our knowledge, this has 
not been previously described. 
The patient was a neonate who underwent echocardiographic 
evaluation for mild desaturations noted by pulse 
oximetry. The echocardiogram revealed a moderately 
dilated right ventricle with right-to-left shunting through a 
secundum atrial septal defect. There was high suggestion 
for TAPVR and further investigation revealed that the left 
upper pulmonary vein drained by a vertical vein to the left 
innominate vein (LIV) and the left lower pulmonary vein 
drained directly into the coronary sinus (CS) (Figure 1). 
The right-sided pulmonary veins drained by a descending 
vertical vein adjacent to the right atrium (Figure 2,A), 
coursing down toward the midline behind the atria and 
From the Division of Cardiology, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles; 
and Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California (G.C.K., P.C.W., M.S.S., 
M.Y.U., J.C.W.). 
Reprint requests: Grace Kung, MD, 4650 Sunset Blvd, MS No. 
34, Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027 
(E-mail: gkung@chla.usc.edu). 
doi:10.1016/j.echo.2004.06.001 
Figure 1 Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiographic 
image with color Doppler from modified parasternal 
short-axis view showing red flow toward transducer in 
left vertical vein (LVV), which drains left upper pulmonary 
vein to innominate vein. Also shown is left lower pulmonary 
vein (LLPV) draining to coronary sinus (CS). LA, Left 
atrium. 
through the diaphragm, eventually draining to the hepatic 
system (Figure 2,B). Other than the atrial septal defect, the 
remainder of the cardiac anatomy was normal. There was 
mild flow turbulence in the CS and in the descending vein 
below the diaphragm but no discrete obstruction. A 
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging scan was obtained 
that confirmed the various sites of drainage. The patient 
was clinically stable without respiratory distress or evidence 
of poor cardiac output. The patient remained 
hemodynamically stable throughout the course of the 
hospitalization and was presented for elective repair. 
DISCUSSION 
The incidence of TAPVR has been reported at 
0.008% of live births, with an incidence of approximately 
2.2% of patients with congenital heart disease.
3 It is also commonly associated with other 
cardiac abnormalities. Type I involves drainage to 
the systemic venous system by a left-sided vertical 
1084
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography 
Volume 17 Number 10 
Figure 2 Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiographic images with color Doppler. A, Suprasternal 
notch view showing descending vein (DV), which drains right pulmonary veins coursing away from 
transducer inferiorly adjacent to right atrium (RA). B, Subcostal coronal view showing DV, which drains 
right pulmonary veins coursing through liver and joining hepatic system (H). 
vein (an embryologic remnant of the left cardinal 
system) to the LIV or directly to the right superior 
vena cava (RSVC). Type II involves drainage directly 
into the heart usually by the CS or directly to the 
right atrium. Type III involves drainage by a descending 
vein coursing below the diaphragm and 
joining the inferior vena cava, hepatic veins, or 
portal system. This type commonly has obstruction 
of the pulmonary venous return. Type IV is rare and 
involves multiple sites of drainage. A common form 
consists of the left upper pulmonary vein draining to 
a vertical vein, which then drains to the LIV, and the 
remainder of the pulmonary veins drain to the CS. 
Delisle et al4 reported a distribution of type I (45%), 
type II (26%), type III (24%), and type IV (5%). 
Darling et al1 reported a distribution of type I (55%), 
type II (30%), type III (13%), and type IV (2%). 
Various types of mixed drainage to two different 
sites have been reported. Delisle et al4 reported 5 
cases of mixed drainage, 4 of which had veins 
draining to the LIV and to another site such as the CS 
or RSVC, and the remaining case drained to the 
portal vein and to the RSVC. Imoto et al5 reported 11 
cases of mixed drainage, most of which had a 
solitary vein draining to the LIV or RSVC with the 
remainder draining into a common confluence and 
then connecting to the CS, RSVC, or below the 
diaphragm. Cayre et al6 reported a case where the 
right-sided veins drained to the CS and the left-sided 
veins drained to the RSVC. 
Our case is unusual in it involves a combination of 
all 3 levels of drainage in one patient and also 
illustrates the importance of defining all the sites of 
possible drainage of the pulmonary veins in the 
setting of TAPVR, as they can involve multiple 
Kung et al 1085 
levels. In this particular case, 2-dimensional echocardiography 
with color flow Doppler clearly delineated 
the various sites of drainage. However, in 
some instances, details of pulmonary venous drainage 
can be difficult to define by echocardiography. If 
there is uncertainty about the drainage patterns, 
magnetic resonance imaging can be used as an 
adjunct, although this may require patient sedation 
to obtain optimal images. 
REFERENCES 
1. Darling RC, Rothney WB, Craig JM. Total pulmonary venous 
drainage into the right side of the heart; report of 17 autopsied 
cases not associated with other major cardiovascular anomalies. 
Lab Invest 1957;6:44-64. 
2. Chin AJ, Sanders SP, Sherman F, Lang P, Norwood WI, 
Castaneda AR. Accuracy of subcostal two-dimensional echocardiography 
in prospective diagnosis of total anomalous pulmonary 
venous connection. Am Heart J 1987;113:1153-9. 
3. Ferencz C, Rubin JD, McCarter RJ, Brenner JI, Neill CA, Perry 
LW, et al. Congenital heart disease: prevalence at live birth; the 
Baltimore-Washington infant study. Am J Epidemiol 1985; 
121:31-6. 
4. Delisle G, Ando M, Calder AL, Zuberbuhler JR, Rochenmacher 
S, Alday LE, et al. Total anomalous pulmonary venous 
connection: report of 93 autopsied cases with emphasis on 
diagnostic and surgical considerations. Am Heart J 1976;91: 
99-122. 
5. Imoto Y, Kado H, Asou T, Shiokawa Y, Tominaga R, Yasui H. 
Mixed type of total anomalous pulmonary venous connection. 
Ann Thorac Surg 1998;66:1394-7. 
6. Cayre RO, Civetta JD, Roldan AO, Rousseau JJ, Knudson OA 
Jr, Valdes-Cruz LM. Mixed total anomalous pulmonary venous 
connection: case report with bilateral venous collectors. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr 2003;16:84-7.
