Wood, J. C., C. Enriquez, et al. (2005). "MRI R2 and R2* mapping accurately estimates hepatic iron concentration in transfusion-dependent thalassemia and sickle-cell disease patients." Blood.
	Measurements of hepatic iron content (HIC) are important predictors of transfusional iron burden and long-term outcome in patients with transfusion-dependent anemias. The goal of this work was to develop a readily available, non-invasive method for clinical HIC measurement. The relaxation rates R2 (1/T2) and R2* (1/T2*) measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have different advantages for HIC estimation. This manuscript compares noninvasive iron estimates using both optimized R2 and R2* methods in 102 patients with iron overload and 13 controls. In the iron-overloaded group, 22 patients had concurrent liver biopsy. R2 and R2* correlated closely with HIC (r(2)>/= 0.95) for HICs between 1.33 and 32.9 mg/g, but R2 had a curvilinear relationship to HIC. Importantly, the R2 calibration curve was similar to the curve generated by St. Pierre, et al, despite significant differences in technique and instrumentation. Combined R2 and R2* measurements did not yield more accurate results than either one alone. Both R2 and R2* can accurately measure hepatic iron concentration throughout the clinically relevant range of HIC with appropriate MRI acquisition techniques.

Wood, J. C., M. Otto-Duessel, et al. (2005). "Cardiac iron determines cardiac T2*, T2, and T1 in the gerbil model of iron cardiomyopathy." Circulation 112(4): 535-43.
	BACKGROUND: Transfusional therapy for thalassemia major and sickle cell disease can lead to iron deposition and damage to the heart, liver, and endocrine organs. Iron causes the MRI parameters T1, T2, and T2* to shorten in these organs, which creates a potential mechanism for iron quantification. However, because of the danger and variability of cardiac biopsy, tissue validation of cardiac iron estimates by MRI has not been performed. In this study, we demonstrate that iron produces similar T1, T2, and T2* changes in the heart and liver using a gerbil iron-overload model. METHODS AND RESULTS: Twelve gerbils underwent iron dextran loading (200 mg . kg(-1) . wk(-1)) from 2 to 14 weeks; 5 age-matched controls were studied as well. Animals had in vivo assessment of cardiac T2* and hepatic T2 and T2* and postmortem assessment of cardiac and hepatic T1 and T2. Relaxation measurements were performed in a clinical 1.5-T magnet and a 60-MHz nuclear magnetic resonance relaxometer. Cardiac and liver iron concentrations rose linearly with administered dose. Cardiac 1/T2*, 1/T2, and 1/T1 rose linearly with cardiac iron concentration. Liver 1/T2*, 1/T2, and 1/T1 also rose linearly, proportional to hepatic iron concentration. Liver and heart calibrations were similar on a dry-weight basis. CONCLUSIONS: MRI measurements of cardiac T2 and T2* can be used to quantify cardiac iron. The similarity of liver and cardiac iron calibration curves in the gerbil suggests that extrapolation of human liver calibration curves to heart may be a rational approximation in humans.

Wood, J. C., J. M. Tyszka, et al. (2004). "Myocardial iron loading in transfusion-dependent thalassemia and sickle cell disease." Blood 103(5): 1934-6.
	Cardiac T2* (magnetic resonance imaging relaxation parameter) is abnormally low in approximately 40% of adults with thalassemia major (TM), suggesting myocardial iron deposition, but it is unknown at what age this occurs. To address this question, we measured cardiac T2* and function in 19 young patients (aged 7-26 years) with TM as well as 17 patients receiving long-term transfusions for sickle cell anemia (SCA) matched for age, sex, and liver iron content. Cardiac T2* was normal in all of the SCA patients but was low (high iron) in 8 of 19 TM patients. Abnormal T2* was observed only in the TM patients receiving transfusions for 13 years or longer and was correlated with ferritin but not liver iron levels. Cardiac dysfunction was present in 3 of the 8 patients with low T2*. Cardiac T2* changes have a long latency relative to liver iron accumulation. Total transfusional burden is a significant independent risk factor for low cardiac T2* and may partially account for differences observed between patients with SCA and TM.

Wells, W. J., N. S. Hussain, et al. (2004). "Stenting of the mainstem bronchus in children: a word of caution." Ann Thorac Surg 77(4): 1420-2.
	We present two patients with critical hemorrhage following expandable metallic stenting of the left mainstem bronchus in children. Stent migration with erosion into a bronchial artery leading to mycotic pseudoaneurysm formation and overwhelming pulmonary hemorrhage occurred in both patients. One patient died from uncontrollable hemoptysis. The second patient was salvaged by left pneumonectomy and patch repair at the site of mycotic aortic rupture. Stenting of a mainstem bronchus, particularly in cyanotic children must be approached with extreme caution.

Kung, G. C., H. Gao, et al. (2004). "Total anomalous pulmonary venous return involving drainage above, below, and to the heart: a mixed bag." J Am Soc Echocardiogr 17(10): 1084-5.
	
